---
layout: post
title: A Critique of Marriage Story
---

*Marriage Story* is, undoubtedly, a great film. There's a degree of technical skill in both the camera work & cumulative acting ability that's difficult to fault. It's not hard to see how it earned so many accolades. It's perhaps because of this level of mastery on the practical level that a contrast forms between it and its narrative content: the writing is shallow and coarse.

It doesn't take the world's greatest detective to realise that *Marriage Story* is written by someone familiar with the subject matter surrounding divorce. [This isn't even the author's first film dealing with the subject](https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0367089/). In-spite of expecting this to grant him insight, the observations he makes are cynical and juvenile, opting to skirt around taking a stance on anything in favour of 'touching' moments, like having Adam Driver sing "Being Alive", which do little for either character development, overall narrative, or even artistic value (I've heard more impassioned renditions by drunk crackheads).

---

In order of viewing, my thoughts:

1) The initial reading of both protagonists' thoughts is easily my favourite part-of the film, to a degree that I felt cheated when the film never returned to that level of raw human honesty. Both pieces were so devastatingly well-written that it must have taken an experienced author several hours to put together. When one considers that neither protagonist ever displays any particular writing skill, it must have taken them even longer in the context of the film's story. To commit so much time (and love) towards someone you're currently (supposedly) harbouring feelings of spite for is an incredible feat of human resilience and compassion. I expected, given that set-up, that the protagonists would reconcile more completely, because they obviously share a deep connection that most people could never even hope to accomplish. 

Therefore, it's especially jarring that Nicole (Scarlett Johansson) refuses to read out her thoughts during counselling. This is never really elaborated on, or returned to, or anything really, even though she just spent fucking **ages** writing one of the most beautiful renditions of someone's person that I've ever heard. If it was written in an inexperienced hand, or was too lovey dovey, or just garbled rubbish, I'd have maybe been fine with it, but it's not. It's tremendously beautiful.

If we accept the narrative that Johansson really was embarrassed, it's then later inconsistent that their son finds the piece and that she allows both him and Driver to read it. There are several possible angles here, but none of them really add-up:

- She forgot it, but this is unlikely to be the case, because she's constantly shown to be a thorough planner. It's also been forgotten in a place that her son could find easily, but not by her who keeps a spotless household.

- She harbours secret feelings for Driver, but if that's a secret, this is simply contrary to allowing both her son and him to read it (and she has ample time to intervene and stop them). The secret feeling angle is also never backed up elsewhere in the film - actually, to the contract, she seems to have moved on easily.

- She's confident in her words, so she doesn't mind them reading it, but this is at odds with originally opting not to read it out aloud. If she wasn't confident at the time, she sure as shit isn't now - who in their right mind remains confident in words they wrote a year previously during a rough patch, let alone suddenly become confident in them when they weren't previously?

- Both Johansson and Driver are incredibly mature adults with a great communication system, so they're fine with maintaining honest feelings for one another while getting on with their own individual lives. I believe that this is what the author intended, but a great communication system is not something you pull out of your fucking ass like magic. It takes many years of hard work, sweat, tears and above all, perseverance (which they very clearly fucking opt against). To think that people can just grow up out of nowhere, after years of immaturity and shitty communication is incredibly fucking naive and disingenuous. This explanation is as bad as a [training montage](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cf6SaA-Kdro&t), but without the exposition, or supreme motivational 80s music.

Overall, I suspect that this scene is a victim of editing - it's difficult to imagine how this came together anywhere except accidentally and on the cutting board. I hate that I'm over-examining this, but fuck you for coming up with something so great, before then proceeding to half-ass it. It was **this** close to being sublime. 

2) Johansson's lawyer, the role that won *Marriage Story* its Oscar, is painfully inconsistent. It's either telling of the current state of film awards, or doubly impressive that Laura Dern still managed to impress in-spite of the quality of her character (or lack thereof):

- Initially, it appeared to me that Dern was manipulating Johansson, particularly because her dialogue & actions seemed to come out of a textbook (empathy, dressing down, cute tea & biscuits). This is later reinforced by the film itself, as it regularly takes cheap shots at both the legal profession and the legal system, especially in its depiction of Driver's two lawyers and when Driver & Johansson opt to ease demands on their own terms anyway. Talking honestly about things solves problems created by lack of communication, who'd have thought, right? Near the end of the film, Johansson & Dern appear to have become friends, but it's so half-assed, fuck off.

- Dern is depicted as a super duper divorce lawyer, but Driver's average lawyer seems to do just fine. In-fact, there seems to be no discernible difference between the average lawyer and Driver's "asshole" lawyer (as he calls him), who appears to achieve nothing except waste everyone's money, since Johansson's lawyer gets the better deal anyway. It's actually not clear what Driver's asshole lawyer actually achieved that his first one did not. Once again, I think this is a victim of the cutting board - it made for an interesting scene to have Driver's asshole lawyer suddenly show up after Driver is seen paying for his first 'shitty' lawyer, but this leads to absolutely no pay-off. It could be that the author is trying to send a message about the futility of it all, but this seems to be half-assed, like just about every other difficult subject in the film.

- Fuck you with that zoom in when Dern took off her shoes on the couch. What are you trying to achieve? This is something you highlight if you want to make her appear sympathetic, but at the same time, the author is consistently critical of her profession. Where the fuck are you going with this?

- It's never explained why Johansson opted to hire a lawyer, when the protagonists explicitly agreed not to. I imagine it's because Dern is charming, but that lends credence to her being manipulative, so why make them friends at the end? Is she an actual sympathetic character, or not? Please make up your fucking mind. I think it's acceptable for real life human beings to be immutably complex, but this is a story and supporting characters should serve a purpose. What the fuck is the purpose of Dern's character, other than being on the receiving end of Johansson's expositional rant when they first meet?

3) On the note of Johansson's rant... it's never really clear why her relationship with Driver has deteriorated. It might be an interesting artistic choice to keep the audience guessing as to why and what went wrong, but as is a reoccurring theme so far, this is done in a half-assed way. The most common reason given seems to be Driver's reluctance to move to Los Angeles, but this is kind-of... shit? If you want to move somewhere, you sit down with your partner and discuss it. Following that, it can take as short as few days, or several months to reach a satisfying compromise. From the way the characters speak (& from what's depicted in the film), it doesn't seem like this simple, basic conversation has ever happened. In-fact, the characters never simply sit down and fucking speak maturely. They have exactly one honest conversation in the entire (2hours15min) film and it's actually an angry, irrational argument after which they decide to ease off on the lawyering.

I'd like to take a large leap here: this appears to be, particularly, where the author's own experience with divorce shines through. Hollywood director & author Noah Baumbach was previously married to Hollywood actress Jennifer Jason Leigh. It goes without saying that both these people are (compared to the rest of us) wealthy and therefore, it's likely that the author's experience with the arena of love & romance is not the same arena that his characters experience in this film. Extrapolating from there, I believe that this is why the character's reasons for divorce are nonsensical: Baumbach's life is comparatively alien to ours.

4) That Johansson apparently visited 11 attorneys before settling on Dern is... weird? It's at odds with her visiting Dern, just to check her out because someone suggested it. A secretary that explains to Driver that it's a common tactic for spouses to visit several attorneys to legally bar them from representing the other spouse. This seems to imply that Johansson is a petty wanker, but absolutely nothing like this ever occurs again (or does so before it). It also leads Driver to having a shitty time with his son, something which she consistently avoids. This seems to be completely anomalous - in-fact I suspect one could chop the entire scene out and it wouldn't impact the film in any way.

5) Another poorly fleshed out element in the film is that Driver is seemingly struggling for money, but he always seems to make due in-spite of his two expensive lawyers, fine clothes, hotel rooms, 2 apartments, flights, transport expenses, ingredient-heavy meals & insistence that he puts all his money into his theatre company (Which is struggling?). This is also highlighted by Johansson, who states that he wanted to funnel all her newly found acting wealth into his company. 

I think that this can simply be accounted to an out-of-touch author that has forgotten the value of money (and the difficultly other people have to go through to earn it). Bit of trivia, the average cost of a divorce is $15k, so even Driver's first lawyer (who's supposed to be shitty & cheap) is almost double the cost of the average divorce (which would include all the court fees). Fuck knows how much more his "asshole" cost him.

6) In a sense, the film is definitely an *artistic* success in that I'm absolutely sure that every person to watch this film will leave it thinking about it for days to come, but it does so in with a massive cop-out ending: tying someone's shoelaces isn't a pay-off. That they're kind-of reconciled in the end, but not, isn't a pay-off. It's easy to keep your audience thinking when you randomly throw in something nonsensical and unexplained. You'd have had exactly the same impact if, I don't know, Driver found his fucking lightsaber in his back pocket: HMMM SO THIS AND *STAR WARS* ARE IN THE SAME UNIVERSE RIGHT? DEEEEEEEP, OR ELSE HE SECRETLY ACTS IN *STAR WARS* ON THE SIDE? We'll never know, just like we'll never know what the fuck tying his shoelaces is supposed to achieve.

Every narrative component about this film is half-assed - this might also be elaborate *artistic* intent, but you know what? I fucking doubt it.

---

Overall, I think the film somewhat feels like the author drew up a pros & cons list for both protagonists and tried to balance it out so that they were both equally shitty and equally redeemable when compared to one another. Frequently, it feels like the film is about to take a stance on who's actually the asshole, before quickly throwing something else in to make the other person also be shitty to balance the scales. It's cute that the film tries to make it seems like both parties are sympathetic, but if you try to think about that for more than a minute, the entire facade falls fucking flat, because if no one's the asshole, then the entire premise of needing to divorce because someone is an asshole is fucking mute.

The only asshole in this film is the author, Noah Baumbach.